[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
john k
and louise mentioned morning our
headlines today containing the spread of
the new variant of coronavirus
a top government advisor warns that
tougher restrictions will be needed
in more parts of england it is likely
that this will grow in num numbers of
the variant across the country
and i think it's likely therefore that
measures that need to
need to be increased in some places in
due course not
not reduced the french government is to
announce plans to lift the cross-channel
travel ban lorry drivers have spent a
second night in their cabs waiting at
the port of dover
the government said last night there
were almost a thousand lorries parked up
on the motorway but driving around dover
this morning there are htv's
everywhere the figure is likely to be
much much higher
and that's led to concern around food
supply salad from italy
peppers from spain we're all right for
now but the longer this goes on
the greater the risk good morning
rugby league legend kevin sinfield adds
his voice to calls for more research
into concussion he says it's important
not to make assumptions
about the links between rugby league and
brain injuries
good morning it's another cloudy day in
the south to be rain at times
but still very mild for the time of year
whereas in the north
it's colder there's more sunshine and
just a few showers
out of all the details in about 10
minutes
[Music]
hello good morning tuesday the 22nd of
december and our top stories that the
government's chief scientific advisor
has warned
that tougher restrictions are likely to
be needed in more areas of england
to control that new variant of
coronavirus so patrick valance said
further measures may be required to
counter a likely increase in cases as a
result of christmas mixing mr valance
said the more infectious form of the
virus
needs to be taken very seriously as john
donason reports
in london and the south east around 17
million people
are already living under the tightest
tier 4 restrictions
but now a warning from the government's
chief scientific advisor
that stricter measures are likely to be
needed in more areas of england
to try to control the virus it is likely
that this will grow in numbers of the
variant across the country
and i think it's likely therefore that
measures that need to
need to be increased in some places in
due course not
not reduced just three days before
christmas
already many have had to change their
plans
i was uh due to go down to my parents
place for christmas day but we're not
going to be doing that anymore
we were going to have christmas with six
other people in our house
and they're not coming now in greater
manchester and the west midlands health
officials have said
anyone visiting their regions from tier
iv areas
and from wales should self-isolate for
10 days
it comes amid concerns about a
particular new variant of the virus
which the government says has led to a
surge in new infections
it has 17 key differences in its genetic
makeup
the result of random mutations and
roughly half of those changes
are in the spike protein possibly making
it
bind to human cells more effectively
it's likely to be more transmissible
because it's the dominant strain just
now but that is not only dependent on
the virus it's also dependent on
people's behavior
and so we need to see whether it's the
behavior you know whether they were
that was spreading and and that's
accounting for all of these new
infections now
or whether it's really the strain that's
easier to transmit from person to person
the hope remains that an expanded
rollout of vaccines next year will make
all the difference but things could well
get worse
before they get better john donaldson
bbc news
the french government says it will
announce measures today that will allow
transport links with britain to resume
and trade to flow across the channel
again yeah the question is when will
that happen boris johnson and president
macron spoke last night following
france's decision to close its border
after growing concern about the new
variant of coronavirus
here's our transport correspondent
caroline davis
still they wait laurie and van drivers
stand around the entrance of the port of
dover
24 hours since the french closed their
borders to all traffic from the uk with
passengers
and still tonight there are lorries
turning up and being diverted away
border guards here to divert them to
parked up on a nearby street were vans
and cars filled with people
waiting for the border to reopen
preparing to sleep in their vehicles
but still more were arriving this was
the approach into dover's port
on the m20 highways england confirmed
that over 900 vehicles
were parked up last night they're being
redirected to manson airfield
while the french border is closed to
lorries carrying goods with drivers
operation brock a contra flow layout
intended to keep the traffic on the m20
motorway to the coast moving
was also introduced overnight
the european union has said that it's up
to the individual member states to
decide
what restrictions to place on travellers
from britain and how long to keep them
in place
there's no certainty yet on when
vehicles will be able to cross
from the uk to france but the government
has said that work continues at pace
caroline davis bbc news let's go live to
the port of dover now speak to our news
correspondent simon jones who's there
for breakfast this morning
simon there's been a bit of confusion
about how many lorries
have been stuck different figures
offered by the transport secretary last
night and then by highways england
what have you managed to suss out
yes yesterday at the news conference
boris johnson said he thought there were
around 170
lorries parked up on the m20 motorway in
operation
stack by last night the department for
transport said that figure had gone up
to more than a
thousand but driving around kent this
morning there are lorries
parked up pretty much everywhere every
lay-by
every car park so the number of htvs
caught up in this
overall in kent is likely to be much
much higher than that 1 000 figure
now here at the entrance to the port of
dover still pretty extraordinary site
just three days to christmas this is one
of the busiest passenger ferry terminals
in the world and no traffic at all going
over
towards france what is the way out of
this while we're expecting
some sort of announcement from the eu
today that could involve anyone
wanting to cross the channel to have to
have a negative corona virus test but if
you consider
the number of lorry drivers caught up in
all this the
operation that that would take to
introduce this testing to ensure that
everyone had these negative results and
then
being able to prove it at the border to
get across that would be
a massive operation so the sad reality
is for some lorry drives it looks like
they may well be spending christmas in
their cabs
rather than back home oh dear simon
jones thank you very much indeed
um it is understood that people arriving
in northern ireland from the rest of the
uk will be asked to self-isolate for 10
days
the northern ireland executive voted
against imposing a travel ban
from britain fearing it could have
serious implications for the viability
of
air and ferry routes but it is advising
people to avoid
non-essential journeys royal mail has
suspended deliveries to europe except
the irish
republic because of those travel bans
the firm says it's also experiencing
delays to
canada and to turkey meanwhile the
courier company dhl has stopped all
package deliveries
to the uk u.s
u.s president-elect joe biden has
received his first dose of the fisa
covert 19 vaccine live
on television vice president mike pence
and house speaker nancy pelosi have
also had the jab mr biden who's 78 and
considered to be a high risk
group said he was getting to show
americans it is safe
to take and urged americans to get it as
soon as it became
[Music]
available
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news